apply changes from discussion from 2023-06-16 about how to implement … (#91)
SigmaHQ/sigma-specification: appendix_meta_rules.md

### File Inclusion

Sometimes it makes sense to define rules for events in a different file than the correlations, e.g. to make them reusable from multiple correlations or make it possible to use them independently.
For this reason, another document type is included for file inclusion.
An inclusion can be defined by setting the action attribute to include.
All rules contained in the referenced file are handled as if they were defined in the including file.

### Global Filter rules

The purpose of Filter rules is to apply the same tuning on many rules with the goal to suppress matches of multiple rules. This is most commonly useful for environment specific tuning where a false positive prone application is used in an organization and its false positives are accepted.
Example: A valid GPO script that triggers multiple Sigma rules.

# Correlation rules

> All rules in a file, basic event rules as well as correlations, might contain an additional attribute called "generated".

Reviewer: Should be "generate".

Also: This implies that with this change, no current rules will generate queries (since they don't have that field).

Author: This is only meant for rules of type correlation, i.e. having a `correlation: ` section instead of a `dectection:` section.

Author: ```suggestion
All rules in a file, basic event rules as well as correlations, might contain an additional attribute called "generate".
```

Reviewer: About rename: I find it a bit counter-intuitive that this field is called "generate". From a technical perspective it's correct (no queries are generated), but from a high-level user perspective, I don't know what's generated. That it defaults to true (according to documentation below) is also strange / unexpected.
Maybe we could invert it and call it `silent` instead? That would have the "expected" behaviour of defaulting to a zero value (that is, `false`) and it clarifies what this does (if it's set, the rule is silent and does not produce matches).

Reviewer 2: The default behaviour should be that the single rules in a correlation rule are silent. 

Examples:
- The multiple failed logon followed by a successful logon example. You wouldn't want to trigger a rule and see a match for every failed logon. 
- A rule that detects recon activity. You wouldn't want to see matches for every "net" command execution or every "ping". 

So, the default behaviour of the field "silent", if we call it that way, should be "true" and the user can set it to "false" if he wants the single rules in the correlation to show up. 

I wouldn't overcomplicate it with lists of selections. 
But this opinion isn't by far as strong as the one I have on the default behaviour. 
We can allow the user to provide a list of rule `name` that he wants to see matches for. (a list that disables the "silent" for 1-n of the sub rules)

Author: The issue that Max raised was that how does that affect existing rules.

My proposal is to define it like this:
> We can switch back to silent is false by default (implicitly). And silent is true if you set it to true explicitly or if there is no level defined

Author: Another idea how we could specify it:
If a rule has no level set, the default level is "informational". That also should work and we have no need to define either "generate" or "silent" at all.

****** NEED SOME WORK ******
****************************

<!-- TODO: The schema is not correct like this. Will be fixed, finalized and tested in the end -->
```yaml
type: //rec

required:
  id: //str
  correlation:
    type: //rec
    required:
      rules: //arr

>       type: //str

Reviewer 2: two types of `type`

id: 0e95725d-7320-415d-80f7-004da920fc11
```

### Related rules

**Attribute:** rules

Refers to one or multiple Sigma or Correlations rules.
Allowing the user to chain multiple correlations together.
A rule can be referred to by the `id` or `name` of a Sigma rule.

> `name` is a **unique** human-readable name and improves the readability of correlation rules.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`name` is a per correlation **unique** human-readable name that improves the readability of correlation rules.
```

Many failed logins as defined above are followed by a successful login by of the same user account within 1 hour:

```yaml
correlation:
  type: temporal

>   rule:

Reviewer: Should be rules: according to the spec

```yaml
title: —
id: —
correlation:
  type: temporal

>   rule:

Reviewer: Same as above

As a best practice use the prefix `mr_filter_`

<!-- TODO: finalize the rx schema-->
### Schema

```yaml
title: //str
description: //str
action: //str
type: //str
logsource: # optional
    product: //str
    service: //str
global_filter:
    type: //rec
    required:
      detection: //rec
    optional:
      <selections> // rec
      rules: //arr # no defined rules means matching on all rules

```

### Syntax

> Like Sigma rules, "Filter" rules have a title.
> They don't have an id or level as they use the one from the referenced rules.
> <!-- I think they should have a id, even if we don't use it (yet) -->

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Like Sigma rules, "Filter" rules have a `title` and an `id` to facilitate their management.
It has no other meta data like level or status because its purpose is to complete a sigma rule.

```

Author: I updated the suggestion from "complete" to "enrich an existing" Sigma rule. I hope you agree @frack113 ?

As a best practice use the prefix `mr_filter_`

<!-- TODO: finalize the rx schema-->
### Schema

```yaml
title: //str
description: //str
action: //str
type: //str
logsource:
    product: //str
    service: //str
global_-_filter:
    type: //rec
    required:
      detection: //rec
    optional:
      <selections> // rec
      rules: //arr # no defined rules means matching on all rules

```

### Syntax

Like Sigma rules, "Filter" rules have a title.
They don't have an id or level as they use the one from the referenced rules.

> <!-- I think they should have a id, even if we don't use it (yet) -->

Reviewer 4: Global Filter must not change the id of the original rules.
Can a have a `name` like correlation.

Author: The id of a global filter would not replace the id of the original rule. But it would be used to address the global filter, if needed.

Reviewer 4: OK for me, But it has to be explained.

Reviewer 3: +1 for ids. Having unique identifier for objects is always useful

must be `filter`

### Change to Condition

> <!-- What would be an include filter? Something added as "or" to the referenced rules instead of "and not"? -->

Reviewer 4: `action` can be remove too now.
For me can be only "and" or "and not",  "or" means to change the detection logic.
There have been discussions on it, for me 99.99% of filters are "and not".
The idea is to have the possibility of awakening the "and not not" = "and" (or not 😆 ).

Why not a "If omited the value is `exclude`" ?

Author: It doesn't really answer my question what an include filter would be or what it would be used for. I cannot imagine it right now. If you want to include more events to be able to match the original rule, it could only be achieved by adding the include filter with an "or" logic to the original condition.

If we say we just use "and" instead of "and not" to add to the condition, it makes more sense in my opinion, but I wouldn't name it "include filter" then. Maybe this is a feature which we just don't want to support. It makes it harder to understand and to explain and I don't really see the use case. As you said, I also see 99.99% of cases with "and not". Adding something to the filter using "and" would mean a change in the detection logic which means it probably should be a new rule.

Reviewer 4: Why not simplify "global filter" is an "and not" ?
So remove the include or exclude.

Author: Yes, that's what I suggested somewhere in that big blob of text of mine xD. So I agree :)

Reviewer 3: An include can be a computer; a date, a user or practically any metadata like field that can be used to group something to avoid FPs. Then again it'll be confusing as this is called a filter and inclusion in filters doesn't really sound that great.

Example

```yaml
title: Filter Administrator account
description: The valid administrator account start with adm_
logsource:
    category: process_creation

>     product: windows

Author: Just realized by doing a Github review myself: Do we need the logsources for filters? I think I just put them there by mistake/copy paste.

Reviewer 4: I prefer it to be present to avoid filtering on fields that don't even exist in the original events.
It keeps a certain general sense.

Author: The downside would be, that you cannot use a global filter to whitelist an application for process_creation and file_event if filtering via Image was viable.

Reviewer 4: Optional is fine to me.

Reviewer 3: A filter would target fields that exist on all the referenced rules by definition. You can't filter a user if the field isn't there in the first place. So while you might say its implicit it's actually necessary because of field mapping. For example you might have username in process creation events as the username of the user executing the process but in a file event it might mean the owner of the file or something.

global_filter:
  rules:
    - 6f3e2987-db24-4c78-a860-b4f4095a7095 # Data Compressed - rar.exe
    - df0841c0-9846-4e9f-ad8a-7df91571771b # Login on jump host
  selection:
      User|startswith: 'adm_'
  condition: selection
```

# Examples
This section gives complete examples in order to make it easier for people new to Sigma to get started and for showcasing new features of the Sigma standard. Use them as a blueprint for your own ideas.

## Correlation

### Failed Logins Followed by Successful Login

The following Correlation describes a use case in which an attacker successfully performs a brute-force attack. This example helps in showcasing some highlights:
 - You can use YAMLs multi document feature (`---`) to have everything grouped together in one file
 - Rules can be referenced in a human-friendly way using their unique `name`.

>  - Correlations can be used recursively to express more complex use cases

Author: ```suggestion
 - Correlations can be chained to express more complex use cases
```

Reviewer 5: I prefer the term "chained" in favor of "recursively" because recursion means usually something that can also be done in a self-referencing and also endless way.
